Add "How-To: Set up Datadog for distributed tracing" (#3254)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/monitoring/tracing/datadog.md

---
type: docs
title: "How-To: Set up Datadog for distributed tracing"
linkTitle: "Datadog"

> weight: 1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight: 5000
```

description: "Set up Datadog for distributed tracing"
---

Dapr captures metrics and traces that can be sent directly to Datadog through the OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter.

> ## Configure Tracing in Dapr with the OpenTelemetry Collector and Datadog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure Dapr tracing with the OpenTelemetry Collector and Datadog
```

> You can configure Dapr to create traces for each application in your Kubernetes cluster and collect those traces in Datadog, using the OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter, you can configure Dapr to create traces for each application in your Kubernetes cluster and collect them in Datadog.
```

> Follow [the Dapr docs for setting up the OpenTelemetry Collector](https://docs.dapr.io/operations/monitoring/tracing/otel-collector/open-telemetry-collector/#setting-opentelemetry-collector) and:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Before you begin, [set up the OpenTelemetry Collector]({{< ref "open-telemetry-collector.md#setting-opentelemetry-collector" >}}).
```

>   1. Add your Datadog API key to the `./deploy/opentelemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml` file in the `datadog` exporter configuration section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add your Datadog API key to the `./deploy/opentelemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml` file in the `datadog` exporter configuration section:
```

Also, need to be more clear on where in the yaml to put this - maybe include more of the yaml file in the snippet below for context?

Author: Will find this out and add it 👍

    ```yaml
      datadog:
        api:
          key: <YOUR_API_KEY>
    ```

>   2. Apply the `opentelemetry-collector` configuration by running `kubectl apply -f ./deploy/open-telemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Apply the `opentelemetry-collector` configuration by running the following command.  

    ```sh
    kubectl apply -f ./deploy/open-telemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml
    ```
```

>   3. Set up a Dapr configuration file to both turn on tracing and deploy a tracing exporter component that uses the OpenTelemetry Collector, by running `kubectl apply -f ./deploy/collector-config.yaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up a Dapr configuration file that will turn on tracing and deploy a tracing exporter component that uses the OpenTelemetry Collector.  

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -f ./deploy/collector-config.yaml
   ```
```

>   4. Apply the `appconfig` configuration by adding a `dapr.io/config` annotation to the container that you want to participate in the distributed tracing: `dapr.io/config: "appconfig"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Apply the `appconfig` configuration by adding a `dapr.io/config` annotation to the container that you want to participate in the distributed tracing.

   ```yml
   annotations:
      dapr.io/config: "appconfig"
   ```
```

> Create and configure the application. When it runs, telemetry data is sent to Datadog and visible in Datadog APM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create and configure the application. Once running, telemetry data is sent to Datadog and visible in Datadog APM.
```

Small suggestion: could we add a screenshot demonstrating this?

Author: Screen shot it a good idea, I'll try to get one.

Author: done. I think I got the Markdown correct? Please fix if not.

## Related Links/References

> * [Complete example of setting up Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster](https://github.com/ericmustin/quickstarts/tree/master/hello-kubernetes)

Reviewer: @msfussell do you think this sample could be added to the dapr/quickstarts repo?

Reviewer 2: It is best to simply provide a current specific link, rather than update the quickstart.

---
type: docs
title: "How-To: Set up Datadog for distributed tracing"
linkTitle: "Datadog"
weight: 5000
description: "Set up Datadog for distributed tracing"
---

Dapr captures metrics and traces that can be sent directly to Datadog through the OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter.

## Configure Dapr tracing with the OpenTelemetry Collector and Datadog

Using the OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter, you can configure Dapr to create traces for each application in your Kubernetes cluster and collect them in Datadog.

> Before you begin, [set up the OpenTelemetry Collector]({{< ref "open-telemetry-collector.md#setting-opentelemetry-collector" >}}).

1. Add your Datadog API key to the `./deploy/opentelemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml` file in the `datadog` exporter configuration section:
    ```yaml

>       datadog:
>         api:
>           key: <YOUR_API_KEY>

Author: ```suggestion
    data:
      otel-collector-config:
        ...
        exporters:
          ...
          datadog:
            api:
              key: <YOUR_API_KEY>
```

> Before you begin, [set up the OpenTelemetry Collector]({{< ref "open-telemetry-collector.md#setting-opentelemetry-collector" >}}).

1. Add your Datadog API key to the `./deploy/opentelemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml` file in the `datadog` exporter configuration section:
    ```yaml
    data:
      otel-collector-config:
        ...
        exporters:
          ...
          datadog:
            api:
              key: <YOUR_API_KEY>
    ```

1. Apply the `opentelemetry-collector` configuration by running the following command.  

    ```sh
    kubectl apply -f ./deploy/open-telemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml
    ```

1. Set up a Dapr configuration file that will turn on tracing and deploy a tracing exporter component that uses the OpenTelemetry Collector.  

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -f ./deploy/collector-config.yaml

1. Apply the `appconfig` configuration by adding a `dapr.io/config` annotation to the container that you want to participate in the distributed tracing.

   ```yml
   annotations:
      dapr.io/config: "appconfig"

1. Create and configure the application. Once running, telemetry data is sent to Datadog and visible in Datadog APM.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

![Datadog](/images/datadog-traces.png)

```

> Before you begin, [set up the OpenTelemetry Collector]({{< ref "open-telemetry-collector.md#setting-opentelemetry-collector" >}}).

1. Add your Datadog API key to the `./deploy/opentelemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml` file in the `datadog` exporter configuration section:
    ```yaml
    data:
      otel-collector-config:
        ...
        exporters:
          ...
          datadog:
            api:
              key: <YOUR_API_KEY>
    ```

1. Apply the `opentelemetry-collector` configuration by running the following command.  

    ```sh
    kubectl apply -f ./deploy/open-telemetry-collector-generic-datadog.yaml
    ```

1. Set up a Dapr configuration file that will turn on tracing and deploy a tracing exporter component that uses the OpenTelemetry Collector.  

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -f ./deploy/collector-config.yaml

1. Apply the `appconfig` configuration by adding a `dapr.io/config` annotation to the container that you want to participate in the distributed tracing.

   ```yml
   annotations:
      dapr.io/config: "appconfig"

1. Create and configure the application. Once running, telemetry data is sent to Datadog and visible in Datadog APM.

> ![Datadog](/images/datadog-traces.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="/images/datadog-traces.png" width=1200 alt="Datadog APM showing telemetry data.">
```

Dapr docs uses the html img tag

## Related Links/References

> * [Complete example of setting up Dapr on a Kubernetes cluster](https://github.com/ericmustin/quickstarts/tree/master/hello-kubernetes)

Reviewer 2: @kayayarai - I notice in this sample a couple of things
1) Your fork is a very old fork of the quickstarts. Could you pull this to the latest version just to make sure all still works
2) This file here https://github.com/ericmustin/quickstarts/blob/master/hello-kubernetes/deploy/collector-config.yaml uses zipkin as the protocol between Dapr and OTEL collector. Would you be open to also trying this with the otel protocol support as described here https://docs.dapr.io/operations/monitoring/tracing/setup-tracing/#configuration to ensure this works for you?
